[SOUND EFFECTS]
>> I'm Mark Richardson,
PhD in biology.
My company is Risk
Logic Scientific,
though I work for Health
Canada, amongst other companies
and departments.
And I guess my claim
to fame, really,
is risk assessment on mercury
exposure from dental amalgam
that I did for the Health
Canada in 1994, 1995.
And then that sort of led to
a number of studies looking
at the evaluation of the
risks posed by comps or resins
as a possible alternative
to dental amalgam that
has spun off into
looking at gold
and ceramic dental
materials and then
trying to bring risk assessment,
I guess, to the discussion
table, not just
exposure, not just
efficacy as a dental
material, but looking at risks
for potential health effects
in the general population who
might dental amalgam
fillings, that sort of thing.
So that's what I do.
You asked about the whole
issue of how much mercury
do you get from a
tuna fish sandwich,
if you eat a tuna fish sandwich
versus how much you would get
from dental amalgam fillings.
And you had asked me to take
a look at that question.
And I was able to
track down information
on the internet from, I
believe, a physician who
made the claim that, oh, you
get far more mercury from a tuna
fish sandwich than you do
from dental amalgam fillings.
Of course, it was kind
of a blanket statement.
There was no definition
by this person
as to, well, how many
tuna fish sandwiches was
he talking about?
Because you have to know
how many sandwiches you
eat, how much tuna is
actually in each sandwich,
how much mercury is in the
tuna that's in the sandwich.
And then you need to compare
that to amalgam fillings.
Well, how many
fillings, and et cetera?
So the blanket statement
really isn't defensible.
There was no way to
quantify or determine
how this person, this physician
had reached their conclusions.
So I redid all the calculations.
And I would say, if you
have no amalgam fillings
and you eat one tuna
fish sandwich a day,
you know what, you're going
to have more mercury from tuna
than you are from
dental amalgam?
And likewise, if you
have one amalgam filling,
but you never eat
tuna, you're going
to get more mercury from
your amalgam fillings
than you are from tuna fish.
That just kind of makes sense.
But in the balance of
the scheme of things
in terms of the average rate of
tuna fish consumption by the US
population compared
to the average number
of amalgam fillings held by
members of the US population,
you actually get way
more exposure to mercury
from amalgam than you
do from tuna fish.
The second aspect of
that whole comparison
isn't just the levels of
exposure, but the risks.
How does the amount of methyl
mercury you get from tuna fish
compare to the amount
of methyl mercury
that's safe to be taken in?
And the US Environmental
Protection Agency,
they define Safe Dose as a
reference dose or reference
concentration.
In this case, for methyl
mercury, it's a reference dose.
That's the amount that a
person in the population
can be exposed to every
day without concern
about health effects.
So how does the exposure from
eating a tuna fish sandwich
compare to that safe dose?
And you can do exactly the
same thing for dental amalgam?
In fact, that's what I've
been doing since '94, '95.
It's looking at the
exposure and how
it compares to the safe exposure
level for the mercury vapor
that emanates from
dental amalgam fillings.
And the toxicity, if you
look at those safe doses,
the safe exposure levels
as a general definition
of the toxicity of a
substance, the safe level
of exposure for mercury
vapor is much lower
than it is for methyl mercury.
I can't define for you
off the top of my head
right now what those
levels are, probably
around 0.2 micrograms
per kilogram body weight,
I believe, for methyl mercury.
And if you look at the
level of exposure associated
with the US EPA's
reference exposure level,
it's about 10 times lower.
So that would imply,
in a general sense,
that mercury vapor is about 10
times more toxic or potentially
toxic than is methyl
mercury, at least based
on all the information we have
right now on their toxicity.
So not only do you get
a significant exposure
to mercury vapor if you
have amalgam fillings,
the type of mercury
you're being exposed to
is generally about 10 times more
toxic than the methyl mercury
that's coming from fish.
So you've got to combine
those two things to get
a proper sense of the
comparison of relative exposures
and relative risks of tuna, tuna
fish consumption, and methyl
mercury exposure from tuna
fish, and then the mercury
vapor that emanates from
your amalgam fillings.
So in general terms, you get
more mercury from amalgam.
And it's a much more
toxic form of mercury.
And those two combine
to make the risks posed
by dental amalgam probably
rather much more significant.
[SOUND EFFECTS]